From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubbero. [music] This is the Daily.
[music]
Today, the story of how a small group of
Senate Democrats [music] broke from
their colleagues, struck a deal with
Republicans to end the government
shutdown, [music] and touched off the
latest civil war inside their party.
>> [music]
>> I spoke with my colleagues,
congressional reporter Katie Edmonson
and national political correspondent
Shane Goldmaker. [music]
[music]
It's Tuesday, November 11th.
>> Katie, welcome back. Thank you, Michael.
>> I just want to explain that we're
talking to you on Monday afternoon after
a head spinning few days of news that
could keep changing after we talked to
you. And the reason the past few days
have been head spinning is that from the
outside it looked like Democrats were
riding really high after last Tuesday's
election, which seemed to ratify their
strategy of keeping the federal
government shut down as a way of forcing
Republicans and President Trump to
reckon with these sky-high health care
costs. In fact, it seemed to be working
so well that in the aftermath of that
election, Trump declared that the
shutdown was being blamed on Republicans
and was helping Democrats. He
articulated that idea and then Democrats
toss this entire seemingly winning
strategy out of the window. I didn't see
that coming. Well, I think it gave a lot
of people a real sense of whiplash,
Michael, because as you said, I remember
standing outside of Democrats closed
dooror meeting on Wednesday, and they
came out sounding
thrilled by what voters had just done in
New Jersey, New York, Virginia, which is
to show overwhelmingly that they sided
with the Democratic agenda here, which
was focused on lowering costs
specifically. And so we heard from a lot
of Democrats, particularly progressive
Democrats, that look, voters have just
vindicated what our strategy is and
they're telling us they want us to keep
up the fight. But I think what was
always brewing under the surface,
Michael, was that there was this small
clutch of centrist Democrats who have
grown really uncomfortable with all of
the pain points that have emerged of the
shutdown, who were looking for some sort
of offramp,
>> right? a clutch of Democrats who did not
believe that the shutdown was the height
of Democratic success. So tell us who
these senators are and what they started
to do.
>> Well, a lot of these senators hail from
kind of purple or reddish states. A lot
of these are senators who really pride
themselves on having some sort of
bipartisan credentials to their name,
pride themselves on working across the
aisle. And we're talking about the
senators from New Hampshire, Senator Jun
Shaheen and Maggie Hassan. We're talking
about the senators from Nevada,
Katherine Cortez Masto and Jackie Rosen.
Angus King of Maine, he's actually an
independent, but he caucuses with
Democrats. John Federman of
Pennsylvania, of course, someone who
frequently finds himself breaking with
Democrats these days.
>> Mhm.
>> We're talking about Senator Tim Kaine of
Virginia. And finally, and importantly,
there's Senator Dick Durban of Illinois,
who is actually the number two Democrat.
He is the party's whip, who will not be
running for reelection at the end of his
term.
>> Mhm.
>> And I think one of the conclusions that
they all ended up coming to together, is
that the chief demand that their party
had been asking for, which is for
Republicans to vote to extend the
Affordable Care Act subsidies that are
set to expire at the end of the year,
was not going to happen. and it was not
in the cards.
>> And what made them so sure of that with
Republicans starting to openly
acknowledge that the shutdown was going
well for Democrats, that meant them
acknowledging that the healthcare issue
was not going well for them. And what
furthermore made these Senate Democrats
comfortable with the idea of giving up
on the central rationale for shutting
down the government in the first place,
healthcare? Well, I think most of them
saw the writing on the wall, saw the
refusal of President Trump to negotiate,
saw the refusal of Speaker Mike Johnson
over in the House to even commit to
holding a vote on the issue. And then on
the other side of the coin, they saw all
of the pain that has been inflicted on
American voters ever since the shutdown
began. And I think the conclusion that
they came to was yes, extending these
subsidies is extremely important. It's a
fight worth having. However, we don't
see an endgame here, and it is now
coming at the expense of a lot of
working people.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, they begin these quiet
discussions amongst themselves, but also
with centrist Republicans in the Senate
to try to see, is there some sort of
deal we can broker here that can give us
an acceptable offramp so that we can
vote to reopen the government and end
this shutdown? Hm. And what kind of
negotiation does this clutch of moderate
Senate Democrats enter into with
Republicans knowing that healthcare is
off the table?
>> Well, these negotiations essentially
center on spending bills, right? Funding
bills to reopen the government. But what
they ultimately really become centered
around are these measures that Democrats
are pushing for in order to rein in some
of the actions taken by the Trump
administration during the shutdown and
also to protect some of the programs
that the White House sought to weaponize
during that funding lapse,
>> such as
>> some of the big provisions here include
a measure saying all of the workers who
were fired or laid off during the
shutdown have to be returned to their
jobs. Michael, you'll remember that
President Trump has hinted repeatedly
during the shutdown that maybe he would
not give back pay to federal workers who
were furoughed during the shutdown. So,
they include a provision that says the
federal government will repay federal
workers for the paychecks that they
missed and we're providing you with the
money to do it right here in this bill.
>> Gotcha.
>> And this gets kind of wonky, but they
move to protect this independent agency
called the Government Accountability
Office. Um, and this is a government
agency that essentially is a watchdog
for how the White House handles the
funds that Congress appropriates. This
is an agency that has blown the whistle
on the White House seven times alone
this year, saying that the White House
has illegally handled money that
Congress appropriated. And this is an
agency that actually has the power to
sue the White House over impoundment or
when the White House refuses to release
funds that Congress has appropriated.
And so, House Republicans had pushed to
essentially gut the budget of that
agency and to also revoke its power to
sue the White House. And so, in these
negotiations, the senators say, "If you
want a vote to reopen the government,
you need to make sure that this agency
is safe essentially, that it has the
budget that it needs, and it retains all
of the powers that it currently has in
order to sue the White House."
>> Fascinating. And on healthcare, of
course, the senators know that they
cannot get a guarantee on a vote, but
they do get this promise from Senator
John Thun of South Dakota, the majority
leader, that he will hold a vote later
in December, an up or down vote on
whether or not Republicans will extend
the ACA tax subsidies. So in short,
these Democrats negotiate a deal that
pretty much undoes a lot of the damage
from the shutdown and preserves this
government accountability office that
matters to them as an institution that
keeps the president in check. And
finally, and it seems somewhat
significantly, they get what they see as
an ironclad promise that Senate
Republicans will vote on renewing
Affordable Care Act subsidies, which
perhaps they don't think Republicans
will, but that would put Republicans on
record as not doing it.
>> That's right. What they want, Michael,
is exactly that. They want to put every
single Senate Republican on the record
on this issue. And so all of the details
of exactly what they had secured started
trickling out on Sunday evening. I was
sitting up at the capital and lo and
behold, the Senate Appropriations
Committee starts putting out legislative
text that actually contains the details
of these policy wins the Democrats had
secured. And so I'm kind of tearing
through these bills, right, trying to
read exactly what's in them. And it
becomes very clear the more that you
read that it seems like there's really a
deal here. I
>> I think we just have to explain this
Katie because most of us imagine that
Congress is this very topdown place
where decisions come from upon high. But
what you're describing is a handful of
Senate Democrats a little bit going
seemingly rogue and reaching a deal to
try to end the shutdown with Republicans
and the leadership of the Senate
Democrats is not really involved.
>> Well, I'm really glad that you brought
this up, Michael. I mean, that is
completely right. Typically, and
especially in the past couple of years,
Congress has been a very top- down
institution. What we saw here really was
a return to sort of a style of
legislating that was more common maybe 6
years ago, 10 years ago. These were the
so-called gangs that senators really
prided themselves on being a part of,
right? It was the idea that me and my
Democratic friends are going to sit down
in a closed door room with you and your
five Republican friends and we're going
to hammer this out amongst ourselves.
>> And that's really what we saw here. And
I think it's one of the reasons why
again their sudden declaration that they
had a deal really did surprise a lot of
people.
>> Got it.
>> And Michael, the other surprising thing
about the Senate is that even though it
is known for being such a slowm moving
institution, it can really move quickly
when its leaders want it to. And so it
was really not long after these centrist
Democrats declared that they had the
votes for a compromise to reopen the
government that we saw that compromise
be put to a vote on the Senate floor.
And I think this was the moment that the
vast majority of us, myself included,
got clued in on Sunday night, just in
time for a news conference in which this
small group of Democrats goes up to the
microphone and tries to explain why
they're doing what they're doing and why
in a sense they have gone around the
rest of their Democratic colleagues. Can
you just talk to us about what they said
>> today? The Senate voted to start
reopening the government.
So shortly after casting their [music]
votes, this clutch of Democrats holds a
news conference right off the Senate
floor.
>> We took a big step forward to protect
the health care of tens of millions of
Americans [music] in exchange for
funding through January 31st.
And they talk about how important they
believe extending these healthc care
subsidies is. With the government
reopened, we must move quickly to
deliver on that promise and to keep
health care premiums affordable. But
mostly they talk about the pain that
people are experiencing in a shutdown.
>> We were seeing lines to our food banks
in northern Nevada. These were lines
that I hadn't seen since the pandemic.
>> You have senators talking about
>> SNAP recipients, right, who are going
hungry.
>> We have TSA agents. We have airport
controllers.
>> You hear about the federal workers who
have gone for weeks without a paycheck.
This agreement ensures that law
enforcement, air traffic controllers,
and other federal workers get paid. And
one by one, it just becomes very clear
that for these senators, continuing on
with this shutdown was simply not
tenable. This was the only deal on the
table. It was our best chance to reopen
the government and immediately begin
negotiations to extend the ACA tax
credits that tens of millions of
Americans rely on to keep costs down.
Thank you all.
>> Thank you all.
[music]
>> And yet, as we could tell from what was
happening on the floor of the Senate on
Sunday night, the vast majority of their
Democratic colleagues disagree with
them. That's right. At least that's how
they voted. There were exactly eight
Democrats who voted for this deal to
reopen the government. And Michael, that
was the magic number of Democrats needed
in order for this deal to advance.
>> Mhm. which means that the entire rest of
the Democratic caucus voted no.
>> Not only did they vote no, a lot of them
were pretty vocal in saying how
frustrated they were by this decision
made by some of their colleagues
>> tonight.
What this Senate is about to do is make
a horrific situation even worse.
>> And you heard this frustration coming
from a wide swath of the Democratic
caucus, progressives like Senator Bernie
Sanders. If this vote succeeds,
over 20 million Americans
are going to see at least a doubling in
their premiums in the Affordable Care
Act. But you also heard similar noises
being made by people like Senator Alyssa
Slotkin, who I think of as being a
pretty moderate Democrat from Michigan,
>> who said that she simply couldn't lend
her vote to this effort because there
was no real healthc care deal on the
table and that's what she wanted for the
American people.
>> The Democratic leader, Mr. President,
America is in the midst of a
Republicanmade healthcare crisis. And
even Senator Chuck Schumer of New York,
who is the leader of the Senate
Democratic Caucus,
>> I must vote no,
>> says that he is going to oppose this
deal that was brokered by some of his
own members. And he says,
>> "This healthcare crisis is so
>> this healthcare crisis is so severe, so
urgent, so devastating for families back
home that I cannot in good faith support
>> this CR that fails to address the
healthcare crisis."
Now, Michael, it was really only minutes
after these centrist Democrats made
their declaration that they were ready
to vote to reopen the government that
Democrats on Capitol Hill were already
hearing from their voters all across the
country. Actually, as I was standing
outside of that closed door meeting, I
looked over at a senior Democratic aid
who was scrolling on his phone and his
face was he just had a funny look on his
face. He was almost a little ashen. And
I said, "Well, what's going on?" on and
he said, "Oh, I'm just looking at the
reactions to this on social media." And
what he was seeing is what I think we've
all seen.
>> What, if anything, did Democrats get out
of a 40 plus days of a shutdown?
>> Nothing. They didn't get anything. This
is the same deal that Senator John Thun
majority leader John
>> on social media, on cable news.
>> It is unconscionable. Uncionable. And
>> this emotionally charged explosion
within the Democratic party. Like why
are we acting as if Democrats just lost
the election? Democrats had overwhelming
victories.
>> I don't understand how a Democratic
senator goes, "Wow, we won really big.
Let me cave now."
>> I don't understand what these people in
Washington think they're doing
representing the people who they claim
to represent.
>> That I think has resurrected a lot of
the sort of fierce debates that are
happening internally within the party
when it comes to how should Democrats
position themselves in this moment? How
can Democrats [music] best fight back
against the Trump administration?
[music]
>> Well, Katie, thank you very much.
>> Thank you, Michael.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Shane, thank you for being here.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> The last time you were in the studio,
>> less than one week ago.
>> Less than one week ago, election night,
and you came on
to observe what an extraordinary moment
of triumph it was for Democrats. And
now, less than a week later, the
Democrats are screaming at each other.
and resounding victory at the polls has
yielded to claims as Katie just said of
capitulation,
betrayal, caving. What a difference a
week makes. The term that has come up as
I've talked to Democratic strategists
has been that this feels like a self-own
for the Democratic party that the
Democratic Party been riding high after
a rough week for Donald Trump. And here
starting this next week, they decided
this was the moment to give up a fight
that the party's base had been craving
and one that they seemingly had been
winning at least politically. I want you
to answer to the best of your ability
this very simple question. Taken in its
totality, if we assume this shutdown is
going to soon be over, was this a good
experience for the Democrats or a bad
one? Let's start with the good. The good
is that the Democratic party has clearly
elevated two issues that it feels are
the winning issues for the party. The
first is healthcare and the second is
affordability told through healthcare.
>> And
those have been the dominant topic of
conversation for weeks, which is pretty
hard to pull off when you're the
minority party with no power in
Washington. And it took a shutdown for
them to do that and for them to elevate
those issues in hopes that long past the
shutdown voters will think, "Oh, that's
the party that's actually fighting for
me on those issues."
>> Right? So that's one side of the ledger,
the good side.
>> That's the good side. But the risk of
that fight was inflating people's
expectations that they were actually
going to win something
>> on those issues, right? They had to say,
"We're fighting for this because we want
xyz outcomes." and they didn't get those
outcomes. They've got the promise of a
vote which is not guaranteed to pass,
>> right? Someone called it a pinky
promise.
>> A pinky promise. There you go. And so
the bad is that the timing of this
shutdown ending is coming just as the
Democratic party was actually starting
to feel some rare momentum in the Trump
era.
>> That's exactly when the Democrats chose
to cave, seemingly when things were
going great. And so this decision to
cave at this moment is unleashing the
anger and energy that has been urbling
beneath the surface for months, which is
the Democrats are angry at their own
party. And they have been all year. They
have been basically since Kla Harris
lost. And the shutdown was this sort of
notable little reprieve where Democrats
kind of stopped hating Democrats for a
little while. [laughter]
I mean, there was a Quinnipic poll over
the summer that showed that Democratic
approval rating of Democrats in Congress
was at 39%. That's a really bad stat.
And that same pollster took a poll in
October and it had jumped 20 percentage
points to 58%. Not great, right? People
aren't suddenly in love.
>> It's a big increase.
>> I'll be really interested what those
numbers look like now that that bubble
of hope had been inflated and deflated
in this shutdown. Well, talk about the
consequences of having created this hope
bubble, this idea that the shutdown was
going to lead to meaningful changes in
the country's healthcare system, which
we don't think they are, and in a
broader sense would show that Democrats
were willing to really take on the
president, which they were until they
weren't. [snorts]
I mean, this was always the risk of
entering the shutdown, right? Chuck
Schumer was very clear about why they
should have this shutdown, what they
were fighting for, but there wasn't an
endgame to get out of it with a win on
policy. And so, you were always going to
have this ugly ending, as people have
described it to me, that the fear of how
it was going to end was going to be bad,
even if in all these unlikely ways they
were actually doing okay in public
polling about the issue. And so
who actually voted to end the shutdown I
think is really revealing.
>> And the people who voted to actually end
the shutdown are the people furthest
removed from facing any real backlash
because none of those eight Democratic
senators, Democratic aligned senators
are on the ballot next year.
>> They're all either retiring or on the
ballot in 2028 or 2030. The Senate has
these staggered terms and this is
something you can do in Washington. try
to keep your most vulnerable people out
of having to cast the toughest votes.
>> Interesting. You're saying that the
Democrats, to the degree that this is
any kind of organized strategy, which I
guess we're not entirely sure, put the
safest Democratic senators furthest from
election out to do the quote unquote
dirty work here of reopening the
government without fulfilling the
promise of improving healthcare.
>> Yes. So, I think the yes votes here are
really revealing, but there's one no
vote that I found especially
interesting.
>> Who?
>> John Oaf. He is the most vulnerable
senator up for election next year. So,
he will face the voters
>> and he's running in Georgia and really
focused on his general election, right?
No one's running against him in the
primary right now. And what the no vote
here says is that he doesn't want to
risk backlash from inside his own party
in this campaign.
>> Whether that's from a potential primary
challenger who could get recruited from
one of these angry groups
>> or whether it's the small donors who are
fueling his campaign deciding, you know
what, maybe we're not so into John Oaf.
He doesn't want to risk backlash. That's
fascinating because as you're
suggesting, John Oaf
could reasonably be most focused on a
Republican opponent in a general
election saying you should have voted to
reopen the government. That's what
matters in this race. And instead, what
you're saying is he's more worried about
upsetting Democrats in a potential
primary. And that's what animated his
vote on the shutdown. And in the end, he
votes to keep the government shut down
because he wants to look like he's on
the side of the Democratic base. That's
what we think happened here.
>> Yeah. And I have not talked to Senator
Oaf here, but what you can see is that
there are two choices. Choice one is
vote to reopen the government and say,
"I'm going to buck my party and I'm
going to reopen the government even if
people in my left attack me for it."
Right? That's a selling point in a lot
of places, right? And so here's a
Democrat saying, you know, that's not
the right calculus here to the extent
he's making a politically motivated
choice. The right calculus is to make
sure that your own party likes you and
supports you and sees you as a fighter
because you want that energy behind you
in a coming midterm election. I noticed
as well that several of the Democrats
hoping to be the next presidential
nominee woke up this morning on Monday
and decided that this was a terrible
decision. I think a lot of them decided
last night. They didn't even wait. You
know, like they started issuing these
statements on Sunday.
You saw it from Gavin Newsome who said
just as it was done that America
deserves better. You saw it from Chris
Murphy who's in the Senate.
>> Um, [music] you can see how tired I am.
I've been here all weekend. Have been
working throughout the past few weeks to
try to prevent this moment.
>> Who said we could have won this fight?
We gave up too early.
>> There's no way to defend this. Uh, and
you are right to be angry about it. I'm
angry about it.
>> You saw it from Roana.
>> Can we recover? Yes. I think that the
first step to recovering uh is to have
generational change and new leadership.
Someone
>> congressman from California who said
Schumer it's time for him to go
>> he is not meeting the moment. He's out
of touch with where the party's base is.
>> If you are thinking or planning to run
for president as a Democrat in 2028,
you've basically denounced this deal.
[music]
Well, Shane, since Roana brought Chuck
Schumer up, let's talk about his place
in all of this. There's a fair bit of
anger being directed at him today as
we're speaking. Yet, he's the one who
brought the Democrats into the shutdown.
He helped create the strategy. He is the
architect of now what has been the
longest shutdown in history and the
architect of fighting on these
particular issues, right? saying these
are something that we can fight for now
and win on later. Elevate this for
voters. Make them think about
affordability. Make them think about
healthcare. He created the message. He's
kept them on the message and he kept his
conference together for 40 days. Um
>> so, so why are people mad at him?
>> Because he's the leader, right? The
frustration is Chuck Schumer, if he was
really the leader, would keep his party
in line until he decided that the fact
that he didn't vote with him. Sure. That
that means he's not supporting ending
the shutdown right now, but he's not
actually leading and keeping them in
line sufficiently to have the fight that
they want to have.
>> Got it. So, I just want to observe where
we are. And it's a really interesting
place. Democrats who want to be
president are railing against this deal
that was achieved by fellow Democrats.
That's how much they want a fight right
now against President Trump. Senators
like John Oaf in a very purple place.
They're fighting this deal to end the
shutdown the way that it's probably
going to be ending. That's how much he
wants a fight against President Trump
right now. The majority of Senate
Democrats are voting against this deal
struck by their own fellow Democrats.
That's how much the whole party wants to
be fighting President Trump right now as
as a kind of a brand message. And that
brings me back to what our colleague
Carl Hulse said to me the night that the
shutdown began 40ome days ago. He argued
that the Trump era has fundamentally
changed the Democratic party. In a
sense, it's radicalized it. And the
party wants to say as loudly as
possible, we are not the Democratic
party of those eight moderates
who did this deal. That's not who we
are. We exist to fight President Trump.
And if that means we have to fight
ourselves in a kind of civil war, if
that means we're going to take out our
anger at our own Senate Minority Leader
Chuck Schumer, so be it. We will be the
party of fighting Trump. Period. One of
the defining forces for Democrats in
Trump's second term is that voters are
angry at their own party.
>> And I think that's part of what gets us
into the shutdown. It's part of why
they're going to be disappointed by the
results of the shutdown.
>> And we're going to see what that looks
like next year, right? That anger, that
energy, that has worked for parties
before to take back power.
>> And [snorts] so I think Democrats are
trying to tread carefully here. They
want to keep the voters angry, but they
would like to direct the anger at the
[laughter] other party. At the moment,
it's being directed internally. And
that's getting back to that self-owned
moment, right? Which is last week you
saw angry voters turn out and vote out
Republicans all across the country. And
the concern is what if we've turned that
anger back at us now? And as quickly as
possible, they're going to try to
harness that energy, that anger, that
frustration, and say, "We fought the
good fight here. You wanted us to fight.
We did the fight. [music]
And even if we didn't get everything we
wanted, we showed you that we can and
would and that the details of how this
ended are going to be forgotten far
sooner than the fact that they had the
fight in the first place.
>> In other words, the message now is don't
worry about the way this ended. Just be
glad it even happened. [music]
>> Just remember the fight we had.
>> Well, Shane, thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
[music]
On Monday night, the Senate approved
[music] a package of spending bills
backed by the eight Senate Democrats and
every Senate Republican that would end
the government shutdown.
Those [music] bills now head to the
Republican controlled House, which is
expected to adopt them later this week.
[music] If that happens, the government
will reopen by the end of the week.
We'll be right back.
[music]
Here's what else you need [music]
to know. Day. At the Supreme Court on
Monday, the justices denied a request
that they consider overturning the
court's landmark [music] 2015 decision
to legalize same-sex marriage. The
decision was closely watched by gay
Americans and their allies who feared
that the court's conservative majority
might reverse the gay marriage [music]
ruling in the same way that they
eliminated the nationwide right to an
abortion.
But the high court agreed that it would
hear a case challenging [music]
mail-in ballot rules across the country.
The case revolves around Mississippi's
5-day grace [music] period, which allows
election officials to count ballots that
have been mailed on election day, but
arrive a few days later.
Dozens of states have similar grace
periods as Mississippi's. [music] So, if
the court finds that Mississippi's rules
are illegal, it could [music] create
chaos leading up to the 2026 elections.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tennisceter and Anna Foley.
It was edited by Rachel Quester and
Patricia [music] Willins. Contains music
by Rowan Evesto, Dan Powell, and Marian
Lozano. [music] and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bubaro. See you tomorrow. [music]